Staff onboarding presents a unique opportunity for a system administrator to educate incoming employees on IT security best practices and influence them on adopting digital hygiene from the onset. 

Some best practices in this regard include: 
- **“De-mystify” technology/security**: In addition to creation of user accounts and setting accurate permissions to various systems, ensure that you set aside time to orient new staff to tech policies, walk them through the risk assessment framework (Refer to Chapter 1) for the organization and the corresponding security protocols that were put in place in response to the risks identified. It’s important to spend time with end-users to establish a trust relationship and “de-mystify” technology as holistic security encompasses technology, process and people. One can have the best technology and practices in place; however if they are not used or followed appropriately, then other efforts will fall short of safeguarding an organization against security threats. (Refer to Chapter 3 for ongoing user education & awareness raising). 
- **Common Threats**: Onboarding is also a good time to share examples of common threats based on your local context, such as an example of a phishing email to make employees aware of what they should be on the lookout for, how they can recognize common threats and what they should do if they come across a similar threat. 
- **Quick hands-on training**: Starting a new job is an unusually busy time for a new employee - they have lots to do as they try to get acquainted with their new work responsibilities, people & processes. Without adding a huge burden on their already stretched time, partner with their supervisor to ensure that time is set aside for a 1-1 training session during their first week. Based on your organization’s risk scenario, training should focus on “low-hanging fruit” security tactics such as password management, 2-factor authentication, BYOD policy, mobile security, secure data backup and secure communication tools, if the scenario warrants it. Be sure to schedule a follow-up session after 30 days as part of the ongoing user education & awareness raising training activities (Refer to Chapter 3). 
- **Physical Security**: Provide a walking tour of the facilities to point out secure areas where access is unauthorized and share the physical security protocol set for your organization based on various scenarios (Refer to Chapter 10 for best practices). 

**Staff Departure**

Having contributed to the organization’s success, staff who are moving on (whether on friendly terms or otherwise) have had access to internal systems, documents and contacts. It is important to put the necessary measures in place to prevent data loss or unauthorized access to systems and ensure business continuity. 
- **Network Access**: Establish a checklist to close out user account access to email & other corporate systems (intranet, databases, data repositories), including any social media accounts or cloud repositories that were maintained by the employee. 
- **Physical Access**: Your closeout checklist should also include a mechanism for departing staff to return any keys or access cards that grant them physical access to the office facilities. 
- **Device submission**: Be sure to receive back any devices submitted to the user (such as laptops or phones) as part of their employment; revoke access to VPN access or work accounts on personal devices (BYOD). Ensure that all personal data stored on work devices is backed-up by the employee before it gets erased. 
- **Organizational Data Handover**: During their tenure, staff may have drafted documents and established relationships with new partners or donors. Ensure that as part of the work load handover managed by their supervisor, there is a policy and process in place for departing staff to store organizational data (documents and contact details) before their accounts are closed. 
- **Monitor account access**: Setup an alert to monitor access to sensitive data via disabled accounts. (Refer to Chapter 7 for best practices on Network Security). 

**Tools & Templates**
- University of Oklahoma, Information Technology New Hire Checklist: http://dentistry.ouhsc.edu/Portals/0/Onboarding%20checklist%20for%20IT_1.pdf
- ABA Law Practice Magazine, Departing Employee Technology Checklist: http://apps.americanbar.org/lpm/lpt/articles/pdf/mgt04101.pdf
- Lawyers’ Professional Indemnity Company, Employee Departure Checklist: http://www.practicepro.ca/practice/pdf/EmployeeDepartureChecklist.pdf
- CSOOnline, Tim Giles' book "How to Develop and Implement a Security Master Plan": http://www.csoonline.com/article/2124300/security-leadership/sample-termination-checklist.html
